[docs] Create a new page to introduce the concept of slots (#13881)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/common-concepts/custom-components/custom-components.md

# Custom slots and subcomponents

> <p class="description">Learn how to override the default DOM structure of the MUI X components.</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p class="description">Learn how to override parts of the MUI X components.</p>
```

"override the default DOM structure" feels a bit misleading to me.

Author: It was the wording on the pickers page
But I also prefer your version

> ## What is a slot?

Author: Good idea

But some of the content there do not apply well for component of the size of the one in X.
For instance:

>  Slots are most commonly filled by HTML tags, but may also be filled by React components.

This is wrong for X, very few slots in X are filled by HTML tags.
The vast majority are filled by React components which have several HTML tags.

> All components contain a root slot that defines their primary node in the DOM tree; more complex components also contain additional interior slots named after the elements they represent.

I think every single X component has internal slots.
And I'm not 100% sure that every single X component has a root slot (but they probably should).

___

I'll try to re-work the section to keep the good parts of the core doc without putting things that don't make sense for X.

> ## What is a slot?

Author: @samuelsycamore I expended a bit the "What is a slot" section.

I don't think there is a lot of info in the core section that are relevant here tbh.

A slot is a part of a component that can be overridden and / or customized.

## Basic usage

### How to override a slot?

You can override a slot by providing a custom component to the `slots` prop:

{{"demo": "CustomSlot.js"}}

### How to customize a slot?

You can pass props to any slot using the `slotProps` prop:

{{"demo": "CustomSlotProps.js"}}

You can also use both `slots` and `slotProps` on the same component:

{{"demo": "CustomSlotAndSlotProps.js"}}

> Most components also support a callback version of `slotProps`.

Author: You are entirely right

This callback receives an object that contains information about the current state of the component,
that information can vary depending on the slot being used:

{{"demo": "CustomSlotPropsCallback.js"}}

> ## Correct usage

Reviewer: Well done, this section is very much needed! 👍🏻

Author: Kudos to @LukasTy , it's a pure copy paste :laughing:

  return (
    <DateCalendar
      slots={{
        calendarHeader: () => (
          <input value={name} onChange={(event) => setName(event.target.value)} />
        ),
      }}
    />
  );
}
```

```jsx
// ❌ The `calendarHeader` slot is re-defined each time `name` is updated,
// causing the component to remount.
function MyApp() {
  const [name, setName] = React.useState('');

  const CustomCalendarHeader = React.useCallback(
    () => <input value={name} onChange={(event) => setName(event.target.value)} />,
    [name],
  );

  return <DateCalendar slots={{ calendarHeader: CustomCalendarHeader }} />;
}
```

```jsx
// ✅ The `calendarHeader` slot is defined only once, it will never remount.
const CustomCalendarHeader = ({ name, setName }) => (
  <input value={name} onChange={(event) => setName(event.target.value)} />
);

function MyApp() {
  const [name, setName] = React.useState('');
  return (
    <DateCalendar
      slots={{ calendarHeader: CustomCalendarHeader }}
      slotProps={{ calendarHeader: { name, setName } }}
    />
  );
}
```

## Usage with TypeScript

### Type custom slots

If you want to ensure type safety on your custom slot component,

> you can declare your component using the `PropsFromSlot` interface:

Author: How would you access the props expected by a given slot without this util?

> you can declare your component using the `PropsFromSlot` interface:

Reviewer 2: If the type is not exported—in no clear way.
If it is, by importing the type (i.e. `PickersCalendarHeaderProps` in this case).

> you can declare your component using the `PropsFromSlot` interface:

Author: A solution would indeed be to always export the props of a slot AND to have a consistent nomenclature.
Which can be hard to do since the name of the slot do not give you enough information to know the name of the props interface (I am using the `toolbar` slot of the `DateTimePicker`, is the interface `DateTimePickerToolbarProps`? or `PickersToolbarProps`? or `PickersDateTimePickerProps`?)

The main advantage of this util is that you can use the slot interface of the component you are passing the slot to (and this is trivial to import it) to retrieve the props of the slot.

> you can declare your component using the `PropsFromSlot` interface:

Reviewer 2: Those are great points. 👍 
I agree with them, just wanted to clarify the direction. 👍 
Such a solution is the next level above DX. 💯

> you can declare your component using the `PropsFromSlot` interface:

Author: Your comment forced me to re-think why I created this util in the 1st place so it's always useful :laughing:

```tsx
function CustomCalendarHeader({
  currentMonth,
}: PropsFromSlot<DateCalendarSlots<Dayjs>['calendarHeader']>) {
  return <div>{currentMonth?.format('MM-DD-YYYY')}</div>;
}
```

:::success

> The `PropsFromSlot` is exported from every package that supports slots:

Author: I still need to export them from the charts and the tree view yes (it's listed in the description :angel: )

```ts
import { PropsFromSlot } from '@mui/x-data-grid/models';
import { PropsFromSlot } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/models';
// ...
```

> It takes a slot (as defined in the `slots` prop of your component) and returns the props that the slot receives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It takes the slot type (as defined in the `slots` prop of your component) and returns the props that the slot receives.
```
